Services like GitHub, Bitbucket, and GitLab have democratized access to affordable (or free!) tools that reinforce reproducibility in research, via the code repositories that these services offer. These services make it easier to backup, version control, collaborate on, and distribute code (or any other text-based file). These features make it easier for researchers to write and maintain high-quality code. These features also increase the chance that someone else will review the code for errors or bugs. These reviews can be done by some combination of reading and executing the code. Unfortunately, unless the code is run on the exact same computer, while logged in as the same user, getting the same code to run the same way can be a research project in and of itself.

Universities and research laboratories often conduct their work on shared HPC clusters. These clusters are all set up on slightly different configurations of hardware and operating system software. Trying to recreate an environment to re-run code exactly as it was executed on another cluster, an environment where all of the C pointers align the Java versions sync, up is beyond the abilities, free time, and account privileges of most researchers who may want to try to reproduce your results. Singularity is an implementation of a "container", and an engine to run those containers. Containers allow researchers to isolate the software environment needed to produce a result away from the configuration and operating system of the computer that the analysis will be run on. This means that your colleague at University X can run the analysis exactly the same way on their cluster as you are running it on your cluster at University Y, and all it requires is sharing a git repository (code) and a container image (software).